now Jeffrey nice is a barister and human
rights lawyer who prosecuted Slobodan
mosovich at the Yugoslav tribunal he
explains why South Africa's case stands
out in the history of international
law the convention was signed in 48
became effective in 53 it's now 70 years
75 years or whatever it is since it
became effective and in that time no
great power has had the courage to do
what South Africa is doing now and what
once before was done by an African
country The Gambia in respect of Myanmar
because what should be done is that
whenever genocide is detected any other
party to the convention should deal with
the matter by prevention and prevention
needs them to do something the first
thing they can do is take the matter to
the international court of justice as
South Africa has done to seek in this
case first to seek protective measures
which means getting an order from the
court that is Israel should stop what
it's doing so it's not unprecedented
it's unusual but it's only unusual
because the great Powers have refused
for their own reasons and probably for
their own interests to perform the
undertaking that falls on them under
article one of the convention and to
deal with genocide as soon as they see
it oh artto is a professor of Holocaust
and genocide studies at Brown University
he joins us now uh from Cambridge in the
UK thanks very much for being with us so
first of all what do you make of this
decision by South Africa to to file this
case against um uh Israel and the
international court of
justice well I think as the as the um
previous pres was saying um this is very
unusual but I think it's a very
important uh move on the part of South
Africa my s is that it has uh it it may
have two effects one is that there will
be an international body a respected
body that will actually deliberate over
this uh because many people have been
using the term genocide not always
accurately uh to say whether they think
what they're seeing on the ground is
genocide and the second is I think that
it will have an effect on the policy
itself that is the very fact that it's
come to the to the court may have an
effect on Israel and on other countries
putting pressure on it so it seems to me
by large a rather positive step when you
say it would have it will have an effect
on the Pol policy itself just expand on
that what do you mean by
that well look I mean if the if the um
International court of justice uh rules
that it is genocide it it and and and uh
offers any measures then that would have
to go to the security Council and in the
security Council uh this would have to
be debated that is this would become an
international issue uh so that would put
pressure on the United States to clarify
its position and thereby would put
pressure on Israel either to modify its
policies or to what I'm hoping to
actually begin talking about what is the
next phase once the fighting ends
hopefully as soon as possible what would
be the next phase so in that sense it
just could greatly increase pressure to
change the course of things as they are
happening right now well you just
mentioned there that you hope the
fighting will end um as soon as possible
and there are many people who share that
um uh who share that hope but we've just
been hearing from the Israeli Prime
Minister within the last hour he's given
a televised speech in which he says that
um uh the war will go on will likely go
on for many months until until Israel in
his eyes achieves um Victory so there
doesn't seem seem to be much of a a
sentiment inside
Israel uh for now for either wanting to
to bring this war to a hold or to to um
bring it to another phase as it
were well I mean if if you follow the
debate going on in Israel now there's a
little bit of uh double talk there and
that has to do not only with pressure
from the United States but also with the
sense that the way operations are
happening in Gaza from the point of view
of the Israeli military right now uh is
not very good the IDF is sustaining um
uh daily losses and has not accomplished
its two main goals which was to remove
Hamas and to free the hostages uh and so
it seems to me that as part of uh what
netan is trying to suggest and the chief
of staff said similarly a couple of days
ago is to move on to what they call
phase three which would actually be to
reduce the number of troops on the
ground and then to try and have more
targeted operations directly aimed at
the Hamas leaders as well as um freeing
the hostages whether they can succeed in
doing that or not is unclear but if they
removed um the large numbers of troops
that are on the ground there they may
actually reduce the number of Israeli
casualties uh please the Americans at
least partially and maybe actually have
a more effective operation on the ground
than simply bombing um civilian centers
without any um clear U military
advantage to that oh we'll leave it
there for now om bartov appreciate your
time and I did mistakenly uh say that
you were joining us from Cambridge in
the UK uh you are of course joining us
from Cambridge Massachusetts in the US
so apologies for
that thank
you